MacPhairrson's Happy Family


I


It was over a little footbridge one had to pass to visit MacPhairrson
and his family, a little, lofty, curiously constructed footbridge,
spanning a narrow but very furious torrent. At the middle of the
bridge was a gate--or, rather, a door--of close and strong wire mesh;
and at this point, door and bridge together were encircled by a
_chevaux-de-frise_ of woodwork with sharp, radiating points of heavy
telegraph wire. With the gate shut, nothing less than a pair of wings
in good working order could carry one over to the steep little island
in mid-torrent which was MacPhairrson's home and citadel.

Carried caressingly in the hollow of his left arm, the Boy held a
brown burlap bag, which wriggled violently at times and had to be
soothed into quiescence. When the Boy arrived at the door in the
bridge, which he found locked, he was met by two strange hosts who
peered at him wisely through the meshes of the door. One of these was
a large black and tan dog, with the long body, wavy hair, drooping
silken ears, and richly feathered tail of a Gordon setter, most
grotesquely supported, at a height of not more than eight inches from
the ground, by the little bow-legs of a dachshund. This freakish and
sinister-looking animal gazed at the visitor with eyes of sagacious
welcome, tongue hanging amiably half out, and tail gently waving. He
approved of this particular Boy, though boys in general he regarded as
nuisances to be tolerated rather than encouraged. The other host,
standing close beside the dog as if on guard, and scrutinizing the
visitor with little, pale, shrewdly non-committal eyes, was a
half-grown black and white pig.

Through the gate the Boy murmured familiar greetings to its warders
while he pulled a wooden handle which set an old brown cow-bell above
the door jangling hoarsely. The summer air was full to brimming over
with sound--with the roar of the furious little torrent beneath, with
the thunder of the sheet of cream and amber water falling over the
face of the dam some fifty yards above, with the hiss and shriek of
the saws in the big sawmill perched beside the dam. Yet through all
the interwoven tissue of noise the note of the cow-bell made itself
heard in the cabin. From behind the cabin arose a sonorous cry of
_hong-ka, honk-a-honk_, and the snaky black head of a big Canada
goose appeared inquiringly around the corner. On one end of the hewn
log which served as doorstep a preternaturally large and fat woodchuck
sat bolt upright and stared to see who was coming. A red fox, which
had been curled up asleep under MacPhairrson's one rose bush, awoke,
and superciliously withdrew to the other side of the island, out of
sight, disapproving of all visitors on principle. From the shade of a
thick spruce bush near the bridge-end a moose calf lumbered lazily to
her feet, and stood staring, her head low down and her big ears waving
in sleepy interrogation. From within the cabin came a series of harsh
screeches mixed with discordant laughter and cries of "Ebenezer!
Ebenezer! Oh, by Gee! Hullo!" Then the cabin door swung wide, and in
the doorway appeared MacPhairrson, leaning on his crutches, a green
parrot on his shoulder, and beside his crippled feet two big white
cats.

MacPhairrson, the parrot, and the cats, all together stared hard at
the door on the bridge, striving to make out through the meshes who
the visitor might be. The parrot, scrutinizing fiercely with her
sinister black and orange eyes, was the first to discover. She
proclaimed at once her discovery and her approval by screeching, "Boy!
Boy! Oh, by Gee! Hullo!" and clambering head-first down the front of
MacPhairrson's coat. As MacPhairrson hobbled hastily forward to admit
the welcome guest, the parrot, reaching out with beak and claw,
transferred herself to the moving crutch, whence she made a futile
snap at one of the white cats. Foiled in this amiable attempt, she
climbed hurriedly up the crutch again and resumed MacPhairrson's
shoulder, in time to greet the Boy's entrance with a cordial "Oh, by
Gee! Hullo!"

MacPhairrson (he spelled his name scrupulously MacPherson, but, like
all the other dwellers in the Settlement, pronounced it MacPhairrson,
with a punctilious rolling of the r) was an old lumberman. Rheumatism,
brought on by years of toiling thigh-deep in the icy waters when the
logs were running in the freshets, had gripped him so relentlessly
that one of his legs was twisted to almost utter uselessness. With his
crutches, however, he could get about after his fashion; and being
handy with his fingers and versatile of wit, he managed to make a
living well enough at the little odd jobs of mechanical repairing
which the Settlement folk, and the mill hands in particular, brought
to his cabin. His cabin, which was practically a citadel, stood on a
steep cone of rock, upthrust from the bed of the wild little river
which worked the mill. On the summit of a rock a few square rods of
soil gave room for the cabin, half a dozen bushes, and some sandy,
sun-warmed turf. In this retreat, within fifty yards of the busy mill,
but fenced about by the foaming torrent and quite inaccessible except
by the footbridge, MacPhairrson lived with the motley group of
companions which men called his Happy Family.

Happy, no doubt, they were, in spite of the strait confines of their
prison, for MacPhairrson ruled them by the joint forces of authority
and love. He had, moreover, the mystic understanding which is
essential if one would be really intimate with the kindreds we
carelessly call dumb. So it was that he achieved a fair degree of
concord in his Family. All the creatures were amiable towards him,
because they loved him; and because they wholesomely feared him, they
were amiable in the main towards each other. There were certain
members of the Family who might be described as perennial. They were
of the nature of established institutions. Such were Stumpy, the
freak-legged dachshund-setter; James Edward, the wild gander; Butters,
the woodchuck; Melindy and Jim, the two white cats; Bones, the brown
owl, who sat all day on the edge of a box in the darkest corner of the
cabin; and Ananias-and-Sapphira, the green parrot, so named, as
MacPhairrson was wont to explain, because she was so human and he
never could quite make her out. Ebenezer, the pig, was still too young
to be promoted to permanence; but he had already shown such character,
intelligence, and self-respecting individuality that MacPhairrson had
vowed he should never deteriorate into pork. Ebenezer should stay,
even though he should grow so big as to be inconvenient.

But with Susan, the moose calf, and Carrots, the unsociable young fox,
it was different. MacPhairrson realized that when Susan should come to
her full heritage of stature, he would hardly have room for her on the
island. He would then send to the Game Commissioner at Fredericton for
a permit, and sell the good soul to the agent for some Zo√∂logical
Garden, where she would be appreciated and cared for. As for Carrots,
his conduct was irreproachable, absolutely without blot or blemish,
but MacPhairrson knew that he was quite unregenerate at heart. The
astute little beast understood well enough the fundamental law of the
Family, "Live and let live," and he knew that if he should break that
law, doom would descend upon him in an eye-wink. But into his
narrowed, inscrutable eyes, as he lay with muzzle on dainty,
outstretched black paws and watched the movements of James Edward, the
gander, or Butters, the fat woodchuck, a savage glint would come,
which MacPhairrson unerringly interpreted. Moreover, while his
demeanour was impeccable, his reserve was impenetrable, and even the
tolerant and kindly MacPhairrson could find nothing in him to love.
The decree, therefore, had gone forth; that is, it had been announced
by MacPhairrson himself, and apparently approved by the ever attentive
Stumpy and Ebenezer, that Carrots should be sold into exile at the
very first opportunity.

When the Boy came through the little bridge gate, the greetings
between him and MacPhairrson were brief and quiet. They were fellows
both in the taciturn brotherhood of the woods. To Stumpy and Ebenezer,
who nosed affectionately at his legs, he paid no attention beyond a
careless touch of caress. Even to Ananias-and-Sapphira, who had
hurriedly clambered from MacPhairrson's shoulder to his and begun
softly nipping at his ear with her dreaded beak, he gave no heed
whatever. He knew that the evil-tempered bird loved him as she loved
his master and would be scrupulously careful not to pinch too hard.

As the little procession moved gravely and silently up from the bridge
to the cabin, their silence was in no way conspicuous, for the whole
air throbbed with the rising and falling shriek of the saws, the
trampling of the falls, and the obscurely rhythmic rush of the torrent
around the island base. They were presently joined by Susan, shambling
on her ungainly legs, wagging her big ears, and stretching out her
long, ugly, flexible, overhanging nose to sniff inquiringly at the
Boy's jacket. A comparatively new member of MacPhairrson's family, she
was still full of curiosity about every one and everything, and
obviously considered it her mission in life to acquire knowledge. It
was her firm conviction that the only way to know a thing was to
smell it.

A few steps from the door James Edward, the wild gander, came forward
with dignity, slightly bowing his long, graceful black neck and narrow
snaky head as he moved. Had the Boy been a stranger, he would now have
met the first touch of hostility. Not all MacPhairrson's manifest
favour would have prevented the uncompromising and dauntless
gander from greeting the visitor with a savage hiss and uplifted
wings of defiance. But towards the Boy, whom he knew well, his dark,
sagacious eye expressed only tolerance, which from him was no small
condescension.

On the doorstep, as austerely ungracious in his welcome as James
Edward himself, sat Butters, the woodchuck, nursing some secret grudge
against the world in general, or, possibly, against Ananias-and-Sapphira
in particular, with whom he was on terms of vigilant neutrality.
When the procession approached, he forsook the doorstep, turned his fat,
brown back upon the visitor, and became engrossed in gnawing a big
cabbage stalk. He was afraid that if he should seem good-natured and
friendly, he might be called upon to show off some of the tricks
which MacPhairrson, with inexhaustible patience, had taught him. He
was not going to turn somersaults, or roll over backward, or walk
like a dancing bear, for any Boy alive!

This ill humour of Butters, however, attracted no notice. It was
accepted by both MacPhairrson and his visitor as a thing of course.
Moreover, there were matters of more moment afoot. That lively,
squirming bag which the Boy carried so carefully in the hollow of his
left arm was exciting the old woodsman's curiosity. The lumbermen and
mill hands, as well as the farmer-folk of the Settlement for miles
about, were given to bringing MacPhairrson all kinds of wild creatures
as candidates for admission to his Happy Family. So whenever any one
came with something alive in a bag, MacPhairrson would regard the bag
with that hopeful and eager anticipation with which a child regards
its Christmas stocking.

When the two had entered the cabin and seated themselves, the Boy in
the big barrel chair by the window, and MacPhairrson on the edge of
his bunk, not three feet away, the rest of the company gathered in a
semicircle of expectation in the middle of the floor. That is, Stumpy
and Ebenezer and the two white cats did so, their keen noses as well
as their inquisitive eyes having been busied about the bundle. Even
James Edward came a few steps inside the door, and with a fine
assumption of unconcern kept himself in touch with the proceedings.
Only Susan was really indifferent, lying down outside the door--Susan,
and that big bunch of fluffy brown feathers on the barrel in the
corner of the cabin.

The air fairly thrilled with expectation as the boy took the
wriggling bag on his knee and started to open it. The moment there was
an opening, out came a sharp little black nose pushing and twisting
eagerly for freedom. The nose was followed in an instant by a pair of
dark, intelligent, mischievous eyes. Then a long-tailed young raccoon
squirmed forth, clambered up to the Boy's shoulder, and turned to eye
the assemblage with bright defiance. Never before in his young life
had he seen such a remarkable assemblage; which, after all, was not
strange, as there was surely not another like it in the world.

The new-comer's reception, on the whole, was not unfriendly. The two
white cats, to be sure, fluffed their tails a little, drew back from
the circle, and went off to curl up in the sun and sleep off their
aversion to a stranger. James Edward, too, his curiosity satisfied,
haughtily withdrew. But Stumpy, as acknowledged dean of the Family,
wagged his tail, hung out his pink tongue as far as it would go, and
panted a welcome so obvious that a much less intelligent animal than
the young raccoon could not have failed to understand it. Ebenezer was
less demonstrative, but his little eyes twinkled with unmistakable
good-will. Ananias-and-Sapphira was extraordinarily interested. In a
tremendous hurry she scrambled down MacPhairrson's arm, down his leg,
across the floor, and up the Boy's trousers. The Boy was a little
anxious.

"Will she bite him?" he asked, preparing to defend his pet.

"I reckon she won't," answered MacPhairrson, observing that the
capricious bird's plumage was not ruffled, but pressed down so hard
and smooth and close to her body that she looked much less than her
usual size. "Generally she ain't ugly when she looks that way. But
she's powerful interested, I tell you!"

The little raccoon was crouching on the Boy's right shoulder.
Ananias-and-Sapphira, using beak and claws, scrambled nimbly to the
other shoulder. Then, reaching far around past the Boy's face, she
fixed the stranger piercingly with her unwinking gaze, and emitted an
ear-splitting shriek of laughter. The little coon's nerves were not
prepared for such a strain. In his panic he fairly tumbled from his
perch to the floor, and straightway fled for refuge to the broad back
of the surprised and flattered pig.

"The little critter's all right!" declared MacPhairrson, when he and
the Boy were done laughing. "Ananias-an'-Sapphira won't hurt him. She
likes all the critters she kin bully an' skeer. An' Stumpy an' that
comical cuss of a Ebenezer, they be goin' to look out fer him."


II


About a week after this admission of the little raccoon to his Family,
MacPhairrson met with an accident. Coming down the long, sloping
platform of the mill, the point of one of his crutches caught in a
crack, and he plunged headlong, striking his head on a link of heavy
"snaking" chain. He was picked up unconscious and carried to the
nearest cabin. For several days his stupor was unbroken, and the
doctor hardly expected him to pull through. Then he recovered
consciousness--but he was no longer MacPhairrson. His mind was a sort
of amiable blank. He had to be fed and cared for like a very young
child. The doctor decided at last that there was some pressure of bone
on the brain, and that operations quite beyond his skill would be
required. At his suggestion a purse was made up among the mill hands
and the Settlement folk, and MacPhairrson, smiling with infantile
enjoyment, was packed off down river on the little tri-weekly steamer
to the hospital in the city.

As soon as it was known around the mill--which stood amidst its
shanties a little apart from the Settlement--that MacPhairrson was to
be laid up for a long time, the question arose: "What's to become of
the Family?" It was morning when the accident happened, and in the
afternoon the Boy had come up to look after the animals. After that,
when the mill stopped work at sundown, there was a council held, amid
the suddenly silent saws.

"What's to be done about the orphants?" was the way Jimmy Wright put
the problem.

Black Angus MacAllister, the Boss--so called to distinguish him from
Red Angus, one of the gang of log-drivers--had his ideas already
pretty well formed on the subject, and intended that his ideas should
go. He did not really care much about any one else's ideas except the
Boy's, which he respected as second only to those of MacPhairrson
where the wild kindreds were concerned. Black Angus was a huge,
big-handed, black-bearded, bull-voiced man, whose orders and
imprecations made themselves heard above the most piercing crescendos
of the saws. When his intolerant eyes fixed a man, what he had to say
usually went, no matter what different views on the subject his hearer
might secretly cling to. But he had a tender, somewhat sentimental
streak in his character, which expressed itself in a fondness for all
animals. The horses and oxen working around the mill were all well
cared for and showed it in their condition; and the Boss was always
ready to beat a man half to death for some very slight ill-usage of an
animal.

"A man kin take keer o' himself," he would say in explanation, "an'
the dumb critters can't. It's our place to take keer of 'em."

"Boys," said he, his great voice not yet toned down to the quiet, "I
say, let's divvy up the critters among us, jest us mill hands an' the
Boy here, an' look out fer 'em the best we know how till MacPhairrson
gits well!"

He looked interrogatively at the Boy, and the Boy, proud of the
importance thus attached to him, answered modestly--

"That's just what I was hoping you'd suggest, Mr. MacAllister. You
know, of course, they can't stay on together there alone. They
wouldn't be a Happy Family long. They'd get to fighting in no time,
and about half of 'em would get killed quick."

There was a moment of deliberative silence. No smoking was allowed in
the mill, but the hands all chewed. Jimmy Wright, marking the bright
face of a freshly sawed deal about eight feet away, spat unerringly
upon its exact centre, then giving a hitch to his trousers, he
remarked--

"Let the Boss an' the Boy settle it. They onderstand it the best."

"That's right, Jimmy! We'll fix it!" said Black Angus. "Now,
for mine, I've got a fancy for the parrot an' the pig. That
there Ananias-and-Sapphira, she's a bird an' no mistake. An'
the pig--MacPhairrson calls him Ebenezer--he's that smart ye'd
jest kill yerself laffin' to see him. An', moreover, he's that
clean--he's clean as a lady. I'd like to have them two around
my shanty. An' I'm ready to take one more if necessary."

"Then I think you'll have to take the coon too, Mr. MacAllister," said
the Boy. "He and Ebenezer just love each other, an' they wouldn't be
happy separated."

"All right. The coon fer me!" responded the Boss. "Which of the
critters will you take yerself?"

"I'll wait and see which the rest of the boys want," replied the Boy.
"I like them all, and they all know me pretty well. I'll take what's
left."

"Well, then," said Jimmy Wright, "me for Susan. That blame moose
calf's the only one of the critters that I could ever git along with.
She's a kind of a fool, an' seems to like me!" And he decorated the
bright deal once more.

"Me an' my missus, we'll be proud to take them two white cats!" put in
grey old Billy Smith. "She sez, sez she, they be the han'somest cats
in two counties. Mebbe they won't be so lonesome with us as they'd be
somewheres else, bein's as our shanty's so nigh MacPhairrson's bridge
they kin see for themselves all the time there ain't no one on to the
island any more!"

"Stumpy's not spoken for!" reminded the Boy. The dog was popular, and
half a dozen volunteered for him at once.

"Mike gits the dawg!" decided the Boss, to head off arguments.

"Then I'll take the big gander," spoke up Baldy Pallen, one of the
disappointed applicants for Stumpy. "He knows as much as any dawg ever
lived."

"Yes, I reckon he kin teach ye a heap, Baldy!" agreed the Boss. A
laugh went round at Baldy's expense. Then for a few seconds there were
no more applications.

"No one seems to want poor Butters and Bones!" laughed the Boy.
"They're neither of them what you'd call sociable. But Bones has his
good points. He can see in the dark; and he's a great one for minding
his own business. Butters has a heap of sense; but he's too cross to
show it, except for MacPhairrson himself. Guess _I'd_ better take them
both, as I understand their infirmities."

"An' ain't there a young fox?" inquired the Boss.

"Oh, Carrots; he can just stay on the island," answered the Boy. "If
some of you'll throw him a bite to eat every day, he'll be all right.
He can't get into any mischief. And he can't get away. He stands on
his dignity so, nobody'd get any fun out of having _him!_"

These points decided, the council broke up and adjourned to
MacPhairrson's island, carrying several pieces of rope, a halter, and
a couple of oat-bags. The members of the Family, vaguely upset over
the long absence of their master, nearly all came down to the bridge
in their curiosity to see who was coming--all, indeed, but the fox,
who slunk off behind the cabin; Butters, who retired to his box; and
Bones, who remained scornfully indifferent in his corner. The rest
eyed the crowd uneasily, but were reassured by seeing the Boy with
them. In fact, they all crowded around him, as close as they could,
except Stumpy, who went about greeting his acquaintances, and James
Edward, who drew back with lifted wings and a haughty hiss, resolved
to suffer no familiarities.

Jimmy Wright made the first move. He had cunningly brought some salt
in his pocket. With the casual remark that he wasn't going to put it
on her tail, he offered a handful to the non-committal Susan. The
ungainly creature blew most of it away with a windy snort, then
changed her mind and greedily licked up the few remaining grains.
Deciding that Jimmy was an agreeable person with advantages, she
allowed him to slip the halter on her neck and lead her unprotesting
over the bridge.

Then Black Angus made overtures to Ebenezer, who carried the little
raccoon on his back. Ebenezer received them with a mixture of dignity
and doubt, but refused to stir an inch from the Boy's side. Black
Angus scratched his head in perplexity.

"'Tain't no use tryn' to lead him, I reckon!" he muttered.

"No, you'll have to carry him in your arms, Mr. MacAllister," laughed
the Boy. "Good thing he ain't very big yet. But here, take
Ananias-and-Sapphira first. If _she'll_ be friends with you, that'll
mean a lot to Ebenezer." And he deftly transferred the parrot from his
own shoulder, where she had taken refuge at once on his arrival, to
the lofty shoulder of the Boss.

The bird was disconcerted for an instant. She "slicked" down her
feathers till she looked small and demure, and stretched herself far
out as if to try a jump for her old perch. But, one wing being
clipped, she did not dare the attempt. She had had enough experience
of those sickening, flopping somersaults which took the place of
flight when only one wing was in commission. Turning from the Boy, she
eyed MacAllister's nose with her evil, unwinking stare. Possibly she
intended to bite it. But at this moment MacAllister reached up his
huge hand fearlessly to stroke her head, just as fearlessly as if she
were not armed with a beak that could bite through a boot. Greatly
impressed by this daring, she gurgled in her throat, and took the
great thumb delicately between her mandibles with a daintiness that
would not have marred a rose-petal. Yes, she concluded at once, this
was a man after her own heart, with a smell to his hands like that of
MacPhairrson himself. Dropping the thumb with a little scream of
satisfaction, she sidled briskly up and down MacAllister's shoulder,
making herself quite at home.

"My, but she's taken a shine to you, Mr. MacAllister!" exclaimed the
Boy. "I never saw her do like that before."

The Boss grinned proudly.

"Ananias-an'-Sapphira be of the female sect, bain't she?" inquired
Baldy Pallen, with a sly look over the company.

"Sure, she's a she!" replied the Boy. "MacPhairrson says so!"

"That accounts fer it!" said Baldy. "It's a way all shes have with the
Boss. Jest look at her now!"

"Now for Ebenezer!" interrupted the Boss, to change the subject.
"_You_ better hand him to me, an' maybe he'll take it as an
introduction."

Solemnly the Boy stooped, shoving the little raccoon aside, and picked
the pig up in his arms. Ebenezer was amazed, having never before been
treated as a lap-dog, but he made no resistance beyond stiffening out
all his legs in a way that made him most awkward to handle. Placed in
the Boss's great arms, he lifted his snout straight up in the air and
emitted one shrill squeal; but the sight of Ananias-and-Sapphira,
perched coolly beneath his captor's ear, in a measure reassured him,
and he made no further protest. He could not, however, appear
reconciled to the inexplicable and altogether undignified situation,
so he held his snout rigidly as high aloft as he could and shut his
little eyes tight, as if anticipating some further stroke of fate.

Black Angus was satisfied so far. He felt that the tolerance of
Ebenezer and the acceptance of Ananias-and-Sapphira added distinctly
to his prestige.

"Now for the little coon!" said he, jocularly. But the words were
hardly out of his mouth when he felt sharp claws go up his leg with a
rush, and the next instant the little raccoon was on his shoulder,
reaching out its long, black nose to sniff solicitously at Ebenezer's
legs and assure itself that everything was all right.

"Jumping Jiminy! Oh, by Gee!" squealed Ananias-and-Sapphira, startled
at the sudden onset, and nipped the intruder smartly on the leg till
he squalled and whipped around to the other shoulder.

"Now you've got all that's coming to you, I guess, Mr. MacAllister,"
laughed the Boy.

"Then I reckon I'd better be lightin' out fer home with it!" answered
Black Angus, hugely elated. Turning gently, so as not to dislodge the
passengers on his shoulder, he strode off over the bridge and up the
sawdust-muffled street towards his clapboard cottage, Ebenezer's snout
still held rigidly up in air, his eyes shut in heroic resignation,
while Ananias-and-Sapphira, tremendously excited by this excursion
into the outer world, kept shrieking at the top of her voice:
"Ebenezer, Ebenezer, Ebenezer! Oh, by Gee! I want Pa!"

As soon as the noisy and picturesque recessional of Black Angus had
vanished, Baldy Pallen set out confidently to capture the wild
gander, James Edward. He seemed to expect to tuck him under his arm
and walk off with him at his ease. Observing this, the Boy looked
around with a solemn wink. Old Billy Smith and the half-dozen
onlookers who had no responsibility in the affair grinned and waited.
As Baldy approached, holding out a hand of placation, and "chucking"
persuasively as if he thought James Edward was a hen, the latter
reared his snaky black head and stared in haughty surprise. Then he
gave vent to a strident hiss of warning. Could it be possible that
this impudent stranger contemplated meddling with him? Yes, plainly it
was possible. It was certain, in fact. The instant he realized this,
James Edward lowered his long neck, darted it out parallel with the
ground, spread his splendid wings, and rushed at Baldy's legs with a
hiss like escaping steam. Baldy was startled and bewildered. His legs
tweaked savagely by the bird's strong, hard bill, and thumped
painfully by the great, battering, windy wings, he sputtered: "Jumpin'
Judas!" in an embarrassed tone, and retreated behind Billy Smith and
the Boy.

A roar of delighted laughter arose as James Edward backed away in
haughty triumph, and strolled carelessly up towards the cabin. There
were cries of "Ketch him quick, Baldy!" "Try a leetle coaxin'!" "Don't
be so rough with the gosling, Baldy!" "Jest whistle to him, an' he'll
folly ye!" But, ignoring these pleasantries, Baldy rubbed his legs and
turned to the Boy for guidance.

"Are you sure you want him now?" inquired the latter.

"Course I want him!" returned Baldy with a sheepish grin. "I'll coax
him round an' make friends with him all right when I git him home. But
how'm I goin' to git him? I'm afeared o' hurtin' him, he seems that
delicate, and his feelin's so sensitive like!"

"We'll have to surround him, kind of. Just wait, boys!" said the Boy.
And running into the cabin, past the deliberate James Edward, he
reappeared with a heavy blanket.

The great gander eyed his approach with contemptuous indifference. He
had come to regard the Boy as quite harmless. When, therefore, the
encumbering folds of the blanket descended, it was too late to resist.
In a moment he was rolled over in the dark, bundled securely, picked
up, and ignominiously tucked under Baldy Pallen's arm.

"Now you've got him, don't let go o' him!" admonished the Boy,
and amid encouraging jeers Baldy departed, carrying the bundle
victoriously. He had not more than crossed the bridge, however,
when the watchers on the island saw a slender black head wriggle
out from one end of the bundle, dart upward behind his left arm,
and seize the man viciously by the ear. With a yell Baldy grabbed
the head, and held it securely in his great fist till the Boy
ran to his rescue. When James Edward's bill was removed from
Baldy's bleeding ear, his darting, furious head tucked back into
the blanket, the Boy said--

"Now, Baldy, that was just your own fault for not keeping tight hold.
You can't blame James Edward for biting you!"

"Sure, no!" responded Baldy, cheerfully. "I don't blame him a mite. I
brag on the spunk of him. Him an' me'll git on all right."

James Edward gone, the excitement was over. The Boy picked up the two
big white cats, Melindy and Jim, and placed them in the arms of old
Billy Smith, where they settled themselves, looking about with an air
of sleepy wisdom. From smallest kittenhood the smell of a homespun
shirt had stood to them for every kind of gentleness and shelter, so
they saw no reason to find fault with the arms of Billy Smith. By this
time old Butters, the woodchuck, disturbed at the scattering of the
Family, had retired in a huff to the depths of his little barrel by
the doorstep. The Boy clapped an oat-bag over the end of the barrel,
and tied it down. Then he went into the cabin and slipped another bag
over the head of the unsuspecting Bones, who fluffed all his feathers
and snapped his fierce beak like castanets. In two minutes he was tied
up so that he could neither bite nor claw.

"That was slick!" remarked Red Angus, who had hitherto taken no part
in the proceedings. He and the rest of the hands had followed in hope
of further excitement.

"Well, then, Angus, will you help me home? Will you take the barrel,
and see that Butters doesn't gnaw out on the way?"

Red Angus picked up the barrel and carried it carefully in front of
him, head up, that the sly old woodchuck might not steal a march on
him. Then the Boy picked up Bones in his oat-bag, and closed the cabin
door. As the party left the island with loud tramping of feet on the
little bridge, the young fox crept slyly from behind the cabin, and
eyed them through cunningly narrowed slits of eyes. At last he was
going to have the island all to himself; and he set himself to dig a
burrow directly under the doorstep, where that meddlesome MacPhairrson
had never permitted him to dig.


III


It was in the green zenith of June when MacPhairrson went away. When
he returned, hobbling up with his tiny bundle, the backwoods world was
rioting in the scarlet and gold of young October. He was quite cured.
He felt singularly well. But a desperate loneliness saddened his
home-coming. He knew his cabin would be just as he had left it, there
on its steep little foam-ringed island; and he knew the Boy would be
there, with the key, to admit him over the bridge and welcome him
home. But what would the island be without the Family? The Boy,
doubtless, had done what he could. He had probably taken care of
Stumpy, and perhaps of Ananias-and-Sapphira. But the rest of the
Family must inevitably be scattered to the four winds. Tears came into
his eyes as he thought of himself and Stumpy and the parrot, the poor
lonely three, there amid the sleepless clamour of the rapids,
lamenting their vanished comrades. A chill that was more than the
approaching autumn twilight could account for settled upon his heart.

Arriving at the little bridge, however, his heart warmed again, for
there was the Boy waving at him, and hurrying down to the gate to let
him in. And there at the Boy's heels was Stumpy, sure enough.
MacPhairrson shouted, and Stumpy, at the sound of the loud voice, went
wild, trying to tear his way through the gate. When the gate opened,
he had to brace himself against the frame, before he could grasp the
Boy's hand, so extravagant and overwhelming were the yelping Stumpy's
caresses. Gladly he suffered them, letting the excited dog lick his
hands and even his face; for, after all, Stumpy was the best and
dearest member of the Family. Then, to steady him, he gave him his
bundle to carry up to the cabin, and proudly Stumpy trotted on ahead
with it. MacPhairrson's voice trembled as he tried to thank the Boy
for bringing Stumpy back to him--trembled and choked.

"I can't help it!" he explained apologetically as soon as he got his
voice again. "I love Stumpy best, of course! You kept the best fer me!
But, Jiminy Christmas, Boy, how I miss the rest on 'em!"

"I didn't keep Stumpy!" explained the Boy as the two went up the path.
"It was Mike Sweeny took care of him for you. He brought him round
this morning because he had to get off to the woods cruising. I took
care of Bones--we'll find him on his box inside--and of cross old
Butters. Thunder, how Butters has missed you, MacPhairrson! He's bit
me twice, just because I wasn't you. There he is, poking his nose out
of his barrel."

The old woodchuck thought he had heard MacPhairrson's voice, but he
was not sure. He came out and sat up on his fat haunches, his nostrils
quivering with expectation. Then he caught sight of the familiar
limping form. With a little squeal of joy he scurried forward and fell
to clutching and clawing at his master's legs till MacPhairrson picked
him up. Whereupon he expressed his delight by striving to crowd his
nose into MacPhairrson's neck. At this moment the fox appeared from
hiding behind the cabin, and sat up, with ears cocked shrewdly and
head to one side, to take note of his master's return.

"Lord, how Carrots has growed!" exclaimed MacPhairrson, lovingly, and
called him to come. But the fox yawned in his face, got up lazily, and
trotted off to the other side of the island. MacPhairrson's face
fell.

"He's got no kind of a heart at all," said the Boy, soothing his
disappointment.

"He ain't no use to nobody," said MacPhairrson. "I reckon we'd better
let him go." Then he hobbled into the cabin to greet Bones, who
ruffled up his feathers at his approach, but recognized him and
submitted to being stroked.

Presently MacPhairrson straightened up on his crutches, turned, and
gulped down a lump in his throat.

"I reckon we'll be mighty contented here," said he, "me an' Stumpy,
an' Butters, an' Bones. But I _wisht_ as how I might git to have
Ananias-an'-Sapphira back along with us. I'm goin' to miss that there
bird a lot, fer all she was so ridiculous an' cantankerous. I s'pose,
now, you don't happen to know who's got her, do you?"

"I know she's got a good home!" answered the Boy, truthfully. "But I
don't know that I could tell you just where she is!"

At just this minute, however, there came a jangling of the gate bell,
and screeches of--

"Oh, by Gee! Jumpin' Jiminy! Oh, Boy! I want Pa!"

MacPhairrson's gaunt and grizzled face grew radiant. Nimbly he hobbled
to the door, to see the Boy already on the bridge, opening the gate.
To his amazement, in strode Black Angus the Boss, with the bright
green glitter of Ananias-and-Sapphira on his shoulder screeching
varied profanities--and whom at his heels but Ebenezer and the little
ring-tailed raccoon. In his excitement the old woodsman dropped one of
his crutches. Therefore, instead of going to meet his visitors, he
plumped down on the bench outside his door and just waited. A moment
later the quaint procession arrived. MacPhairrson found Black Angus
shaking him hugely by the hand, Ebenezer, much grown up, rooting at
his knees with a happy little squeal, and Ananias-and-Sapphira, as of
old, clambering excitedly up his shirt-front.

"There, there, easy now, old pard," he murmured to the pig, fondling
the animal's ears with one hand, while he gave the other to the bird,
to be nibbled and nipped ecstatically, the raccoon meanwhile looking
on with bright-eyed, non-committal interest.

"Angus," said the old woodsman presently, by way of an attempt at
thanks, "ye're a wonderful hand with the dumb critters--not that one
could rightly call Ananias-an'-Sapphira dumb, o' course--'n' I swear
_I_ couldn't never have kep' 'em lookin' so fine and slick all
through the summer. I reckon----"

But he never finished that reckoning. Down to his bridge was coming
another and a larger procession than that of Black Angus. First, and
even now entering through the gate, he saw Jimmy Wright leading a lank
young moose cow, whom he recognized as Susan. Close behind was old
Billy Smith with the two white cats, Melindy and Jim, in his arms; and
then Baldy Fallen, with a long blanket bundle under his arm. Behind
them came the rest of the mill hands, their faces beaming welcome.
MacPhairrson, shaking all over, with big tears in his eyes, reached
for his fallen crutch and stood up. When the visitors arrived and gave
him their hearty greetings, he could find no words to answer. Baldy
laid his bundle gently on the ground and respectfully unrolled it. Out
stepped the lordly James Edward and lifted head and wings with a
troubled _honk-a, honka._ As soon as he saw MacPhairrson, he came up
and stood close beside him, which was as much enthusiasm as the
haughty gander could bring himself to show. The cats meanwhile were
rubbing and purring against their old master's legs, while Susan
sniffed at him with a noisy, approving snort. MacPhairrson's throat,
and then his whole face, began to work. How different was this
home-coming from what he had expected! Here, wonder of wonders, was
his beloved Family all gathered about him! How good the boys were! He
must try to thank them all. Bracing himself with one crutch, he strove
to express to them his immeasurable gratitude and gladness. In vain,
for some seconds, he struggled to down the lump in his throat. Then,
with a titanic effort, he blurted out: "Oh, hell, boys!" and sat down,
and hid his wet eyes in Stumpy's shaggy hair.