XLII


Esther kept William within doors during the winter months. If his health
did not improve it got no worse, and she had begun to hope that the
breakage of the blood-vessel did not mean lung disease. But the harsh
winds of spring did not suit him, and there was business with his lawyer
to which he was obliged to attend. A determined set was going to be made
against the renewal of his licence, and he was determined to defeat his
opponents. Counsel was instructed, and a great deal of money was spent on
the case. But the licence was nevertheless refused, and the north-east
wind did not cease to rattle; it seemed resolved on William's death, and
with a sick husband on her hands, and all the money they had invested in
the house irreparably lost, Esther began to make preparations for moving.

William had proved a kind husband, and in the seven years she had spent in
the "King's Head" there had been some enjoyment of life. She couldn't say
that she had been unhappy. She had always disapproved of the betting. They
had tried to do without it. There was a great deal in life which one
couldn't approve of. But Ketley had never been very right in his head, and
Sarah's misfortune had had very little to do with the "King's Head." They
had all tried to keep her from that man; it was her own fault. There were
worse places than the "King's Head." It wasn't for her to abuse it. She
had lived there seven years; she had seen her boy growing up--he was
almost a young man now, and had had the best education. That much good the
"King's Head" had done. But perhaps it was no longer suited to William's
health. The betting, she was tired thinking about that; and that constant
nipping, it was impossible for him to keep from it with every one asking
him to drink with them. A look of fear and distress passed across her
face, and she stopped for a moment....

She was rolling up a pair of curtains. She did not know how they were to
live, that was the worst of it. If they only had back the money they had
sunk in the house she would not so much mind. That was what was so hard to
bear; all that money lost, just as if they had thrown it into the river.
Seven years of hard work--for she had worked hard--and nothing to show
for it. If she had been doing the grand lady all the time it would have
been no worse. Horses had won and horses had lost--a great deal of trouble
and fuss and nothing to show for it. That was what stuck in her throat.
Nothing to show for it. She looked round the dismantled walls, and
descended the vacant staircase. She would never serve another pint of beer
in that bar. What a strong, big fellow he was when she first went to live
with him! He was sadly changed. Would she ever see him strong and well
again? She remembered he had told her that he was worth nearly Â£3000. She
hadn't brought him luck. He wasn't worth anything like that to-day.

"How much have we in the bank, dear?"

"A bit over six hundred pounds. I was reckoning of it up yesterday. But
what do you want to know for? To remind me that I've been losing. Well, I
have been losing. I hope you're satisfied."

"I wasn't thinking of such a thing."

"Yes, you was, there's no use saying you wasn't. It ain't my fault if the
'orses don't win; I do the best I can."

She did not answer him. Then he said, "It's my 'ealth that makes me
irritable, dear; you aren't angry, are you?"

"No, dear, I know you don't mean it, and I don't pay no attention to it."
She spoke so gently that he looked at her surprised, for he remembered her
quick temper, and he said, "You're the best wife a man ever had."

"No, I'm not, Bill, but I tries to do my best."

The spring was the harshest ever known, and his cough grew worse and the
blood-spitting returned. Esther grew seriously alarmed. Their doctor spoke
of Brompton Hospital, and she insisted on his going there to be examined.
William would not have her come with him; and she did not press the point,
fearing to irritate him, but sat at home waiting anxiously for him to
return, hoping against hope, for their doctor had told her that he feared
very long trouble. And she could tell from his face and manner that he had
bad news for her. All her strength left her, but she conquered her
weakness and said--

"Now tell me what they said. I've a right to know; I want to know."

"They said it was consumption."

"Oh, did they say that?"

"Yes, but they don't mean that I'm going to die. They said they hoped they
could patch me up; people often live for years with only half a lung, and
it is only the left one that's gone."

He coughed slightly and wiped the blood from his lips. Esther was quite
overcome.

"Now, don't look like that," he said, "or I shall fancy I'm going to die
to-morrow."

"They said they thought that they could patch you up?"

"Yes; they said I might go on a long while yet, but that I would never be
the man I was."

This was so obvious she could not check a look of pity.

"If you're going to look at me like that I'd sooner go into the hospital
at once. It ain't the cheerfulest of places, but it will be better than
here."

"I'm sorry it was consumption. But if they said they could patch you up,
it will be all right. It was a great deal for them to say."

Her duty was to overcome her grief and speak as if the doctors had told
him that there was nothing the matter that a little careful nursing would
fail to put right. William had faith in the warm weather, and she resolved
to put her trust in it. It was hard to see him wasting away before her
eyes and keep cheerful looks in her face and an accent of cheerfulness in
heir voice. The sunshine which had come at last seemed to suck up all the
life that was in him; he grew paler, and withered like a plant. Then
ill-luck seemed to have joined in the hunt; he could not "touch" a winner,
and their fortune drained away with his life. Favourites and outsiders, it
mattered not; whatever he backed lost; and Esther dreaded the cry
"Win-ner, all the win-ner!" He sat on the little balcony in the sunny
evenings looking down the back street for the boy to appear with the
"special." Then she had to go and fetch the paper. On the rare occasions
when he won, the spectacle was even more painful. He brightened up, his
thin arm and hand moved nervously, and he began to make projects and
indulge in hopes which she knew were vain.

She insisted, however, on his taking regularly the medicine they gave him
at the hospital, and this was difficult to do. For his irritability
increased in measure as he perceived the medicine was doing him no good;
he found fault with the doctors, railed against them unjustly, and all the
while the little; cough continued, and the blood-spitting returned at the
end of cruel intervals, when he had begun to hope that at least that
trouble was done with. One morning he told his wife that he was going to
ask the doctors to examine him again. They had spoken of patching up; but
he wanted to know whether he was going to live or die. There was a certain
relief in hearing him speak so plainly; she had had enough of the torture
of hope, and would like to know the worst. He liked better to go to the
hospital alone, but she felt that she could not sit at home counting the
minutes for him to return, and begged to be allowed to go with him. To her
surprise, he offered no opposition. She had expected that her request
would bring about quite a little scene, but he had taken it so much as a
matter of course that she should accompany him that she was doubly glad
that she had proposed to go with him; if she hadn't he might have accused
her of neglecting him. She put on her hat; the day was too hot for a
jacket; it was the beginning of August; the town was deserted, and the
streets looked as if they were about to evaporate or lie down exhausted,
and the poor, dry, dusty air that remained after the season was too poor
even for Esther's healthy lungs; it made William cough, and she hoped the
doctors would order him to the seaside.

From the top of their omnibus they could see right across the plateau of
the Green Park, dry and colourless like a desert; as they descended the
hill they noticed that autumn was already busy in the foliage; lower down
the dells were full of fallen leaves. At Hyde Park Corner the blown dust
whirled about the hill-top; all along St. George's Place glimpses of the
empty Park appeared through the railings. The wide pavements, the Brompton
Road, and a semi-detached public-house at the cross-roads, announced
suburban London to the Londoner.

"You see," said William, "where them trees are, where the road turns off
to the left. That 'ouse is the 'Bell and Horns.' That's the sort of house
I should like to see you in."

"It's a pity we didn't buy it when we had the money."

"Buy it! That 'ouse is worth ten thousand pounds if it's worth a penny."

"I was once in a situation not far from here. I like the Fulham Road; it's
like a long village street, ain't it?"

Her first service was with Mrs. Dunbar, in Sydney Street, and she
remembered the square church tower at the Chelsea end; a little further on
there was the Vestry Hall in the King's Road, and then Oakley Street on
the left, leading down to Battersea. Mrs. Dunbar used to go to some
gardens at the end of the King's Road. Cremorne Gardens, that was the
name; there used to be fire-works there, and she often spent the evening
at the back window watching the rockets go up. That was just before Lady
Elwin had got her the situation as kitchen-maid at Woodview. She
remembered the very shops--there was Palmer's the butterman, and there was
Hyde's the grocer's. Everything was just as she had left it. How many
years ago? Fifteen or sixteen. So enwrapped was she in memories that
William had to touch her. "Here we are," he said; "don't you remember the
place?"

She remembered very well that great red brick building, a centrepiece with
two wings, surrounded by high iron railings lined with gloomy shrubs. The
long straight walks, the dismal trees arow, where pale-faced men walked or
rested feebly, had impressed themselves on her young mind--thin, patient
men, pacing their sepulchre. She had wondered who they were, if they would
get well; and then, quick with sensation of lingering death, she had
hurried away on her errands. The low wooden yellow-painted gates were
unchanged. She had never before seen them open, and it was new to her to
see the gardens filled with bright sunshine and numerous visitors. There
were flowers in the beds, and the trees were beautiful in their leafage. A
little yellow was creeping through, and from time to time a leaf fell
exhausted from the branches.

William, who was already familiar with the custom of the place, nodded to
the porter and was let pass without question. He did not turn to the
principal entrance in the middle of the building, but went towards a side
entrance. The house physician was standing near it talking with a young
man whom Esther recognised as Mr. Alden. The thought that he, too, might
be dying of consumption crossed her mind, but his appearance and his
healthy, hearty laugh reassured her. A stout, common girl, healthy too,
came out of the building with a child, a little thing of twelve or
thirteen, with death in her face. Mr. Alden stopped her, and in his
cheerful, kind manner hoped the little one was better. She answered that
she was. The doctor bade him good-bye and beckoned William and Esther to
follow him. Esther would have liked to have spoken to Mr. Alden. But he
did not see her, and she followed her husband, who was talking with the
doctor, through the doorway into a long passage. At the end of the passage
there were a number of girls in print dresses. The gaiety of the dresses
led Esther to think that they must be visitors. But the little cough
warned her that death was amongst them. As she went past she caught sight
of a wasted form in a bath-chair. The thin hands were laid on the knees,
on a little handkerchief, and there were spots on the whiteness deeper
than the colour of the dress. They passed down another passage, meeting a
sister on their way; pretty and discreet she was in her black dress and
veil, and she raised her eyes, glancing affectionately at the young
doctor. No doubt they loved each other. The eternal love-story among so
much death!

Esther wished to be present at the examination, but a sudden whim made
William say that he would prefer to be alone with the doctor, and she
returned to the gardens. Mr. Alden had not yet gone. He stood with his
back turned to her. The little girl she had seen him speaking to was
sitting on a bench under the trees; she held in her hands a skein of
yellow worsted which her companion was winding into a ball. Two other
young women were with them and all four were smiling and whispering and
looking towards Mr. Alden. They evidently sought to attract his attention,
and wished him to come and speak to them. Just the natural desire of women
to please, and moved by the pathos of this poor coquetting, he went to
them, and Esther could see that they all wanted to talk to him. She too
would have liked to have spoken to him; he was an old friend. And she
walked up the grounds, intending to pass by him as she walked back. His
back was still turned to her, and they were all so interested that they
gave no heed to anything else. One of the young women had an exceedingly
pretty face. A small oval, perfectly snow-white, and large blue eyes
shaded with long dark lashes; a little aquiline nose; and Esther heard her
say, "I should be well enough if it wasn't for the cough. It isn't no
better since--" The cough interrupted the end of the sentence, and
affecting to misunderstand her, Mr. Alden said--

"No better than it was a week ago."

"A week ago!" said the poor girl. "It is no better since Christmas."

There was surprise in her voice, and the pity of it took Mr. Alden in the
throat, and it was with difficulty that he answered that "he hoped that
the present fine weather would enable her to get well. Such weather as
this," he said, "is as good as going abroad."

This assertion was disputed. One of the women had been to Australia for
her health, and the story of travel was interspersed by the little coughs,
terrible in their apparent insignificance. But it was Mr. Alden that the
others wished to hear speak; they knew all about their companion's trip to
Australia, and in their impatience their eyes went towards Esther. So Mr.
Alden became aware of a new presence, and he turned.

"What! is it you, Esther?"

"Yes, sir."

"But there doesn't seem much the matter with you. You're all right."

"Yes, I'm all right, sir; it's my husband."

They walked a few yards up the path.

"Your husband! I'm very sorry."

"He's been an out-door patient for some time; he's being examined by the
doctors now."

"Whom did you marry, Esther?"

"William Latch, a betting man, sir."

"You married a betting man, Esther? How curiously things do work out! I
remember you were engaged to a pious young man, the stationer's foreman.
That was when you were with Miss Rice; you know, I suppose, that she's
dead."

"No, sir, I didn't know it. I've had so much trouble lately that I've not
been to see her for nearly two years. When did she die, sir?"

"About two months ago. So you married a betting man! Miss Rice did say
something about it, but I don't think I understood that he was a betting
man; I thought he was a publican."

"So he was, sir. We lost our licence through the betting."

"You say he's being examined by the doctor. Is it a bad case?"

"I'm afraid it is, sir."

They walked on in silence until they reached the gate.

"To me this place is infinitely pathetic. That little cough never silent
for long. Did you hear that poor girl say with surprise that her cough is
no better than it was last Christmas?"

"Yes, sir. Poor girl, I don't think she's long for this world."

"But tell me about your husband, Esther," he said, and his face filled
with an expression of true sympathy. "I'm a subscriber, and if your
husband would like to become an in-door patient, I hope you'll let me
know."

"Thank you, sir; you was always the kindest, but there's no reason why I
should trouble you. Some friends of ours have already recommended him, and
it only rests with himself to remain out or go in."

He pulled out his watch and said, "I am sorry to have met you in such sad
circumstances, but I'm glad to have seen you. It must be seven years or
more since you left Miss Rice. You haven't changed much; you keep your
good looks."

"Oh, sir."

He laughed at her embarrassment and walked across the road hailing a
hansom, just as he used to in old times when he came to see Miss Rice. The
memory of those days came back upon her. It was strange to meet him again
after so many years. She felt she had seen him now for the last time. But
it was foolish and wicked, too, to think of such things; her husband
dying.... But she couldn't help it; he reminded her of so much of what was
past and gone. A moment after she dashed these personal tears aside and
walked open-hearted to meet William. What had the doctor said? She must
know the truth. If she was to lose him she would lose everything. No, not
everything; her boy would still remain to her, and she felt that, after
all, her boy was what was most real to her in life. These thoughts had
passed through her mind before William had had time to answer her
question.

"He said the left lung was gone, that I'd never be able to stand another
winter in England. He said I must go to Egypt."

"Egypt," she repeated. "Is that very far from here?"

"What matter how far it is! If I can't live in England I must go where I
can live."

"Don't be cross, dear. I know it's your health that makes you that
irritable, but it's hard to bear at times."

"You won't care to go to Egypt with me."

"How can you think that, Bill? Have I ever refused you anything?"

"Quite right, old girl, I'm sorry. I know you'd do anything for me. I've
always said so, haven't I? It's this cough that makes me sharp tempered
and fretful. I shall be different when I get to Egypt."

"When do we start?"

"If we get away by the end of October it will be all right. It will cost a
lot of money; the journey is expensive, and we shall have to stop there
six months. I couldn't think of coming home before the end of April."

Esther did not answer. They walked some yards in silence. Then he said--

"I've been very unlucky lately; there isn't much over a hundred pounds in
the bank."

"How much shall we want?"

"Three or four hundred pounds at least. We won't take the boy with us, we
couldn't afford that; but I should like to pay a couple of quarters in
advance."

"That won't be much."

"Not if I have any luck. The luck must turn, and I have some splendid
information about the Great Ebor and the Yorkshire Stakes. Stack knows of
a horse or two that's being kept for Sandown. Unfortunately there is not
much doing in August. I must try to make up the money: it's a matter of
life and death."

It was for his very life that her husband was now gambling on the
race-course, and a sensation of very great wickedness came up in her mind,
but she stifled it instantly. William had noticed the look of fear that
appeared in her eyes, and he said--

"It's my last chance. I can't get the money any other way; and I don't
want to die yet awhile. I haven't been as good to you as I'd like, and I
want to do something for the boy, you know."

He had been told not to remain out after sundown, but he was resolved to
leave no stone unturned in his search for information, and often he
returned home as late as nine and ten o'clock at night coughing--Esther
could hear him all up the street. He came in ready to drop with fatigue,
his pockets filled with sporting papers, and these he studied, spreading
them on the table under the lamp, while Esther sat striving to do some
needlework. It often dropped out of her hands, and her eyes filled with
tears. But she took care that he should not see these tears; she did not
wish to distress him unnecessarily. Poor chap! he had enough to put up
with as it was. Sometimes he read out the horses' names and asked her
which she thought would win, which seemed to her a likely name. But she
begged of him not to ask her; they had many quarrels on this subject, but
in the end he understood that it was not fair to ask her. Sometimes Stack
and Journeyman came in, and they argued about weights and distances, until
midnight; old John came to see them, and every day he had heard some new
tip. It often rose to Esther's lips to tell William to back his fancy and
have done with it; she could see that these discussions only fatigued him,
that he was no nearer to the truth now than he was a fortnight ago.
Meanwhile the horse he had thought of backing had gone up in the betting.
But he said that he must be very careful. They had only a hundred pounds
left; he must be careful not to risk this money foolishly--it was his very
life-blood. If he were to lose all this money, he wouldn't only sign his
own death warrant, but also hers. He might linger on a long while--there
was no knowing, but he would never be able to do any work, that was
certain (unless he went out to Egypt); the doctor had said so, and then it
would be she who would have to support him. And if God were merciful
enough to take him off at once he would leave her in a worse plight than
he had found her in, and the boy growing up! Oh, it was terrible! He
buried his face in his hands, and seemed quite overcome. Then the cough
would take him, and for a few minutes he could only think of himself.
Esther gave him a little milk to drink, and he said--

"There's a hundred pounds left, Esther. It isn't much, but it's something.
I don't believe that there's much use in my going to Egypt. I shall never
get well. It is better that I should pitch myself into the river. That
would be the least selfish way out of it."

"William, I will not have you talk in that way," Esther said, laying down
her work and going over to him. "If you was to do such a thing I should
never forgive you. I could never think the same of you."

"All right, old girl, don't be frightened. I've been thinking too much
about them horses, and am a bit depressed. I daresay it will come out all
right. I think that Mahomet is sure to win the Great Ebor, don't you?"

"I don't think there's no better judge than yourself. They all say if he
don't fall lame that he's bound to win."

"Then Mahomet shall carry my money. I'll back him to-morrow."

Now that he had made up his mind what horse to back his spirits revived.
He was able to dismiss the subject from his mind, and they talked of other
things, of their son, and they laid projects for his welfare. But on the
day of the race, from early morning, William could barely contain himself.
Usually he took his winnings and losings very quietly. When he had been
especially unlucky he swore a bit, but Esther had never seen any great
excitement before a race was run. The issues of this race were
extraordinary, and it was heart-breaking to see him suffer; he could not
remain still a moment. A prey to all the terrors of hope, exhausted with
anticipation, he rested himself against the sideboard and wiped drops of
sweat from his forehead. A broiling sunlight infested their window-panes,
the room grew oven-like, and he was obliged at last to go into the back
parlour and lie down. He lay there in his shirt sleeves quite exhausted,
hardly able to breathe; the arm once so strong and healthy was shrunken to
a little nothing. He seemed quite bloodless, and looking at him Esther
could hardly hope that any climate would restore him to health. He just
asked her what the time was, and said, "The race is being run now." A few
minutes after he said, "I think Mahomet has won. I fancied I saw him get
first past the post." He spoke as if he were sure, and said nothing about
the evening paper. If he were disappointed, Esther felt that it would kill
him, and she knelt down by the bedside and prayed that God would allow the
horse to win. It meant her husband's life, that was all she knew. Oh, that
the horse might win! Presently he said, "There's no use praying, I feel
sure it is all right. Go into the next room, stand on the balcony so that
you may see the boy coming along."

A pale yellow sky rose behind the brick neighbourhood, and with agonised
soul the woman viewed its plausive serenity. There seemed to be hope in
its quietness. At that moment the cry came up, "Win-ner, Win-ner." It came
from the north, from the east, and now from the west. Three boys were
shouting forth the news simultaneously. Ah, if it should prove bad news!
But somehow she too felt that the news was good. She ran to meet the boy.
She had a half-penny ready in her hand; he fumbled, striving to detach a
single paper from the quire under his arm. Seeing her impatience, he said,
"Mahomet's won." Then the pavement seemed to slide beneath her feet, and
the setting sun she could hardly see, so full was her heart, so burdened
with the happiness that she was bringing to the poor sick fellow who lay
in his shirt sleeves on the bed in the back room. "It's all right," she
said. "I thought so too; it seemed like it." His face flushed, life seemed
to come back. He sat up and took the paper from her. "There," he said,
"I've got my place-money, too. I hope Stack and Journeyman come in
tonight. I'd like to have a chat about this. Come, give me a kiss, dear.
I'm not going to die, after all. It isn't a pleasant thing to think that
you must die, that there's no hope for you, that you must go under
ground."

The next thing to do was to pick the winner of the Yorkshire Handicap. In
this he was not successful, but he backed several winners at Sandown Park,
and at the close of the week had made nearly enough to take him to Egypt.

The Doncaster week, however, proved disastrous. He lost most of his
winnings, and had to look forward to retrieving his fortunes at Newmarket.
"The worst of it is, if I don't make up the money by October, it will be
no use. They say the November fogs will polish me off."

Between Doncaster and Newmarket he lost a bet, and this bet carried him
back into despondency. He felt it was no use struggling against fate.
Better remain in London and be taken away at the end of November or
December; he couldn't last much longer than that. This would allow him to
leave Esther at least fifty pounds to go on with. The boy would soon be
able to earn money. It would be better so. No use wasting all this money
for the sake of his health, which wasn't worth two-pence-three-farthings.
It was like throwing sovereigns after farthings. He didn't want to do any
betting; he was as hollow as a shell inside, he could feel it. Egypt could
do nothing for him, and as he had to go, better sooner than later. Esther
argued with him. What should she have to live for if he was taken from
her. The doctors had said that Egypt might set him right. She didn't know
much about such things, but she had always heard that it was extraordinary
how people got cured out there.

"That's true," he said. "I've heard that people who couldn't live a week
in England, who haven't the length of your finger of lung left, can go on
all right out there. I might get something to do out there, and the boy
might come out after us."

"That's the way I like to hear you talk. Who knows, at Newmarket we might
have luck! Just one big bet, a winner at fifty to one, that's all we
want."

"That's just what has been passing in my mind. I've got particular
information about the Cesarewitch and Cambridgeshire. I could get the
price you speak of--fifty to one against the two, Matchbox and
Chasuble--the double event, you know. I'm inclined to go it. It's my last
chance."