CHAPTER XI


Some two miles distant from the construction camp at the dam, a little
cavalcade moved slowly through the darkness of a moonless, cloudy
night. A southeast wind was blowing, but it was a drying wind, with no
promise of rain. It had blown for days steadily, until it had sucked
every vestige of moisture from the top earth, leaving it merely powdery
dust. Because of it, too, no dew had fallen; the nights were as dry as
the days.

In the grain fields, the continued blast had stripped the surface soil
away from the young plants, wrenching and twisting them, desiccating
their roots, which, still too feeble to reach what dampness lay lower
down, sucked ineffectually at the dry breast of the earth. The plants
they could not feed took on the pale-green hue of starvation. There,
among the young grain, the stronger gusts lifted dust clouds acres in
extent. Low down along the surface, the soil sifted and shifted
continually, piling in windrows in spots, burying the young plants,
leaving others bare. Odd little devils of whirlwinds, marked by
columnar pillars of dust, danced deviously across the fields and along
the trails. From the standpoint of a disinterested person, the
ceaseless wind would have been unpleasant in its monotony; but from
the viewpoint of a rancher it was deadly in its persistence.

The moving figures were so strung out that it appeared almost as though
they were riding in the same direction fortuitously, without relation
to each other. First came two horsemen; then, at an interval of five
hundred yards, came a buckboard, with two men and a led horse. In the
rear, five hundred yards back, were two more riders.

This order, however, was not the result of accident, but of
calculation. The buckboard held Oscar and the elder McCrae. Also it
contained a quantity of dynamite. Naturally, it was drawn, not by
McCrae's eager road team, but by a pair of less ambition. And the
riders, front and rear, were in the nature of pickets; for, though it
was unlikely that any one would be met at that time of night, it was
just as well to take no chances.

The riders in the lead were Casey Dunne and Tom McHale. Each had a
rifle beneath his leg. In addition, McHale wore two old, ivory-handled
Colts at his belt, and Dunne's single holster held a long automatic,
almost powerful as a rifle. They rode slowly, seldom faster than a
walk, peering ahead watchfully, their ears tuned to catch the slightest
suspicious sound.

"This here is like old times," said McHale. "Durn me if I hadn't about
forgotten the feel of a gun under my leg. I wish we could have our
photos took now. We sure look plenty warlike."

"I don't want any photo," said Casey. "If I can get home without
meeting any one, it will suit me down to the ground. I wish we hadn't
brought these guns. It's safer every way."

"It's safer for some people," McHale commented. "S'pose we struck hard
luck to-night and got backed into a corner or followed up too close--how'd
we look without guns? 'Course, I'd take awful long chances before I
shot _at_ anybody; but all the same a Winchester helps out a retirin'
disposition a whole lot."

"No doubt about that. But the devil of packing a gun is the temptation
to use it before you really have to. That accounts for a lot of
trouble. Why, even in the old days, a man who didn't pack a gun was
safe, unless he tracked up with some mighty mean specimen of a killer.
And those dirty killers usually didn't last long."

"That's so in one way," McHale admitted, "but I look at it different.
If nobody but the killers had packed guns they'd have run the whole
show. Some of them gents killed for the fun of it, like a mink in a
chicken coop. The mean sort'd pick out some harmless, helpless party,
and stomp up and down, r'arin' and cussin' till they got up a big mad.
The chances was about even they'd shoot. Usual they didn't try them
plays on men that wore their artillery in plain sight."

"Well, we haven't any killers now, anyway," said Dunne. "This is about
as far as it's safe to go with the horses. We'll wait till the others
come up."

In a few minutes, the faint straining of leather, creak of springs, and
subdued clank of axles came to them. The buckboard loomed out of the
darkness, and halted suddenly.

"That you, boys?" McCrae's voice asked.

"Yes. We won't take the horses any farther. If that watchman is on the
dam to-night he might hear something. We can pack the powder the rest
of the way ourselves."

The rear riders, young Sandy McCrae and Wyndham, arrived. Then a
dispute arose. No one wished to remain with the horses. Casey Dunne
settled it.

"There's only one man going to plant powder and cut fuses, and that's
Oscar," said he. "If we all go messing around with it in the dark, half
the shots won't fire, and we may have an accident. Outside of that
there's nothing to do except take care of the watchman if he's there;
and he's sure to be. Wyndham, you're not cut out for that sort of work.
You will stay with the ponies. Now, McCrae, you'd better turn around
and drive home."

McCrae pulled the team around. "Good luck, boys," said he quietly, and
was gone. The spare horse which had been tied to the buckboard remained
for Oscar.

The Swede proceeded to load himself with dynamite, placing it around
his legs in the high socks he wore, in the breast of his shirt, and in
his pockets. This was the overflow from a gunny sack in which he
carried the rest. He resembled a perambulating mine.

"Ay ban ready now," he announced.

"I say, Oscar, don't trip," said Wyndham facetiously.

"Nor interfere," McHale added. "Plant them number twelves of yours
plumb wide apart, Oscar, and don't try to scratch your ankle with your
boot."

Oscar grinned at them, his big, white teeth shining in the darkness. He
attempted the repartee of his adopted country.

"You faller tenk you mek big yoke--vat!" said he. "You go to hal,
please."

"Sure--if you bump anything hard," McHale retorted.

"Come on, come on!" said Casey impatiently.

Wyndham remained with the horses. He was to allow the others half an
hour, and then bring the animals down nearer the dam, so that no time
should be lost in getting away. His companions vanished in the
darkness.

Young McCrae took the lead. In the moccasins he affected he trod
noiselessly, making no more sound than a prowling, nocturnal animal.
Casey Dunne followed, almost as light-footed. Behind him Oscar clumped
along, planting his heavy boots solidly at every step. McHale brought
up the rear. Soon they struck an old cattle trail which wound down a
short coul√©e and brought them to the bank of the river immediately
below the dam. McCrae halted.

"There she is," he announced.

Across the river lay the huddled, black shapes of the camp buildings,
with here and there a pallid spot which marked a tent. Not a light was
visible there. Evidently the camp slept, and that was as it should be.
But nearer at hand, beside the bank of the river where the bulk of the
dam reared itself, a solitary light gleamed.

"That's the watchman," McCrae whispered. "We're in luck, boys. He's on
this side."

"Say, Ay sneak up on dat faller," Oscar proposed. "Ay mek von
yump--so!--and Ay gat him in de neck." He uttered a horrible sound,
suggestive of death by strangulation.

"Shut up!" hissed young McCrae fiercely. "_Keep_ him quiet, Tom!"

"Shut up, Oscar!" growled McHale. "Don't you savvy nothing? You and me
ain't in on this. Stand right still now, and don't breathe no harder
than you have to. Go to it, boys!"

If young McCrae had been a prowling animal before, he was now the ghost
of one. Casey Dunne, behind him, endeavoured to copy his noiseless
method of progress. Gradually they drew near the light.

They could discern the figure of the watchman beside it. He was sitting
on a stick of timber, smoking. McCrae drew from his pocket a long
canvas bag, of about the dimensions of a small bologna sausage, and
weighed it in his hand. They crept nearer and nearer. They were not
more than ten feet away. The guardian of the dam laid his pipe on the
timber, rose to his feet, and stretched his arms high above his head in
a huge, satisfying yawn.

At that instant McCrae sprang like a lynx on a fawn. The sandbag
whistled as it cut down between the upstretched arms, and the watchman
dropped as if hit by lightning.

"That was an awful crack, Sandy," said Casey reprovingly. He flashed
the lantern at the face, and slipped his fingers to the wrist. To his
relief, the pulse was strong.

"I had to get through his hat, hadn't I?" said McCrae. "I wasn't taking
any chances. He's got a head like a bull. Come on, let's fix him up."

The watchman came out of their hands trussed up like a fowl for
roasting, securely gagged, with a gunny sack drawn over his head and
tied at the waist. They lifted him between them and bore him away from
the dam to what they considered a safe distance.

"'Watchman, tell us of the night,'" chuckled Casey. "He's all right, by
the way he kicks, and nothing can hit him away out there. They'll see
him first thing in the morning. Hustle up Oscar, now. This is where he
gets action."

Oscar, when he came up, got to work at once. Because the planting of
shots by different men would have been both unsatisfactory and
dangerous he worked alone. The others lay flat in the gloom, watching
the lantern which he had appropriated flitting here and there along the
structure.

"Oscar's some powder man, you bet," McHale observed. "He don't look
like he had the savvy, but he'll cut them fuses so's the shots'll come
mighty near together. Blamed if I know why a Swede takes to powder.
Seems to come natural to 'em, like pawin' snow to a cayuse."

The light blinked and disappeared as Oscar descended. Followed a long
interval of silent waiting. Then across in the camp a dog began to
bark, at first uncertainly, with what was almost a note of
interrogation, and then, as the wind brought confirmation of suspicion
to his nostrils, with savage vigour. By the sound, he was apparently
approaching the dam.

Some sleeper, awakened by the noise, yelled a profane command to the
animal, which had no effect. It merely awakened another, who cursed the
first sleepily.

"Hey, Kelly," he called, "hit that dog with a rock!" A pause. "Hey,
Kelly, wake up, there!"

"I guess we've got Kelly," Casey whispered to Sandy. He called out
hoarsely: "He'll quit in a minute! G'wan to sleep. You don't know your
own luck."

But the dog continued to bark, jumping up and down frantically. A light
appeared in a window of one of the shacks.

"Blazes!" muttered McHale, "somebody's getting up."

A low whistle came from behind them. It was significant of the tension
of the moment that both McHale and McCrae jumped. But Dunne was cooler.

"That's only Wyndham with the horses," he said.

Suddenly a long aperture of light appeared in the dark wall of the
shack. For a moment it was partially obscured by a figure, and then it
vanished utterly. The door had closed. The light from the window
remained.

"Somebody's come out," said McHale. "That's about where Farwell's shack
is. What's keepin' Oscar? He's had time enough. Maybe I'd better go
across and hold up this feller? We don't want----"

The lantern bobbed into view once more. Oscar was coming at last, but
he was taking his time about it. Had he placed the powder? Had he fired
the fuses? Or had something gone wrong at the last moment? They asked
themselves these questions impatiently. It would be just like him to
have forgotten his matches. It might not occur to him to use the
lantern flame. In that case----

"Come on, hurry up there!" McCrae called softly.

Oscar clambered up beside them. "Ay tal you somet'ing----" he began.
But the dog yelped suddenly. A sharp voice cut across to them:

"Kelly! What the devil's going on here? What are you about? Who's that
with you?"

"Farwell!" Dunne whispered. "Did you light the fuses, Oscar?"

"Sure t'ing," Oscar replied. Proud of the phrase, he repeated it. "She
ban light, all right."

"When'll she fire? Quick, now?"

"Mebbe fema minute. We ban haf lots of time to gat out of har. Say,
Kessy, what faller----"

An oath cracked in the darkness like a rifle shot.

"You, Kelly, answer me! Come across here at once!" He paused for a
moment. "By thunder! Kelly, I'll come over there and----"

Casey Dunne did not hear the conclusion of the sentence. His mind was
working swiftly. For, if Farwell tried to come across, he would
probably be killed by the coming explosions; and that must be prevented
at any cost. The destruction of the dam was justifiable, even
necessary. But homicide with it would never do. To shoot in
self-defence or to protect his rights was one thing; to allow a man to
be killed by a blast was quite another. But just how to prevent it was
the question.

"Come along, Casey," McHale urged. "We ain't got too much time."

"Time or not, we can't have Farwell hurt. You go. I'll be after you in
a minute."

"If you stay we all stay," said McHale. "Let him take his chance. Come
on!"

"Git, I tell you," Casey insisted. "I've got to keep him where he is
till the first shot goes." He called out: "All right, Mr. Farwell. You
don't need to come. I'll be there."

"That's not Kelly's voice," snapped Farwell. "What deviltry's going on
here?"

By his voice, Casey guessed that he was advancing. He dropped the
pretence as useless. "Get back, there!" he ordered sharply, but
endeavouring to disguise his natural voice. "Get back to your shack,
you, or I'll drill you!"

Farwell's response came with surprising promptness in the form of a
revolver bullet that sang just above Casey's head. By the momentary
flash of the weapon his big figure was just discernible standing bent
forward, legs wide apart, tense and watchful.

As Casey's hand dropped to his automatic, McHale clutched his wrist.
"Don't shoot!" he whispered.

"I'm not going to hit him," Casey replied. "I'm just going to make him
stay where he is."

"Let me," said McHale, and fired as he spoke. Farwell's revolver
answered. They emptied the guns in the darkness; but as one shot high
by accident and the other low by design, no damage ensued.

The camp, aroused by the shooting, buzzed like a hornet's nest. Lights
appeared everywhere. Dark figures streamed out of doorways and thrown
tent flaps; and, once outside, stood in helpless uncertainty.

"Coom, coom!" cried Oscar. "Ve gat out of har!" They rose and ran in
the dark.

A mighty roar drowned the echoes of the pistol shots, as the bass
bellow of his sire might dominate the feeble bleatings of a new-born
calf. A vivid flash split the night. In the momentary illumination
details were limned sharply--the buildings, the groups of men on one
side, the running figures on the other. And poised, stationary, as it
seemed, in mid-air, above the instant eruption, hung a mushroom cloud
of smoke and dust, specked with fragments of riven wood and shattered
concrete. Through the succeeding contrasted blackness the d√©bris
thudded upon the earth. With scarcely an interval followed a second
shot, a third, a fourth. The air became alive with hurtling masses
raining from the heavens.

The four dynamiters reached Wyndham, who, cursing in his excitement,
was straining every muscle and a comprehensive vocabulary in an effort
to hold the frightened horses.

Casey, McHale, and Sandy seized their nigh stirrups, shot them at their
left toes, gripped saddle horns, and went up in an instant. Oscar, less
expert, fumbled for a hold with his toe, hopping on his right leg as
his horse sidled and backed.

"Stand still, Ay tal you!" he gritted. "By Yudas, Ay club hal from you
purty kvick!"

Young McCrae wheeled his horse on the off side and gripped the
headstall by the bit. "Up you go!" he cried, and Oscar fell into the
saddle, the horn striking him amidships and momentarily checking a
torrent of oaths. "Hang on, now!" McCrae ordered and let go.

They shot away with a wild plunge and a scurry of panicky hoofs. The
going was rough, but luck was with them. They surged up the coul√©e,
emerging on the higher bench land by the trail.

"Look here, Tom," said Dunne, "what did you want to do the shooting for
back there? Afraid I'd get rattled and hit somebody?"

McHale grinned in the darkness. "Not hardly. Mostly, Casey, you _mamook
tumtum_ a heap--you look ahead and savvy plenty. You're foolish--the
way an old dog fox is. But onct in a while you overlook a bet. You're
too plumb modern and up to date."

"What's that got to do with it?"

"A lot. I don't know no other man hereabouts that packs a forty-four
automatic. See, now?"

"No."

"Why, Casey," said McHale, "I'm surprised at you! It's clear as gin.
Them guns spits out the empty shells right where you stand. Farwell
finds 'em, and he goes lookin' for a gun to fit 'em. You've got it.
There ain't no other gun hereabouts that takes forty-four automatic
ammunition. Now, my old gun don't leave no trail of ca'tridges to
follow unless I breaks her open. So I just naturally horned in and
played the hand myself."