CHAPTER X

THE PUNG RIDE


The grocer's boy had delivered all of his parcels except two large
paper bags which he had pushed over near the dasher. Patricia began to
bring out the cushions, and the boy tossed them in upon the straw which
lay upon the floor of the pung. Then Patricia and Arabella climbed in,
the boy cracked his whip, the horse sprang forward with a surprising
jolt, then settled down to a comical amble.

How cold it was! Arabella had wondered at the number of shawls which
Patricia had taken. Now she was very glad to wrap two around her, while
Patricia wore the other two.

"G'lang!" shouted the boy, and again the horse gave an amazing hop which
sent the pung forward with a lurch, and rolled the two girls over upon
the straw. Patricia thought it a joke, but Arabella, never very
good-tempered, was actually angry. "O dear!" she cried, "I think it's
just horrid to be shaken up so. Well, I don't think you're very nice to
laugh about it, Patricia. I wouldn't like to take any one out to a
sleighride, and have 'em banged around,--oh, o-o!"

It was a "thank-you-ma'am" in the middle of the road that caused
Arabella's angry speech to end in a little shriek.

It was useless for Patricia to try to hide her merriment. She could not
help laughing. She rarely felt sorry for any one's discomfort, and
really Arabella did look funny.

In the shake-up, her hat had been pushed over to one side of her head,
but she did not know that, and her old-fashioned little face looked
smaller than usual, because of the two heavy shawls which were crowded
so high that she appeared to have no neck at all. Small as her face
was, it could show a great deal of rage, and as she drew her shawls
tighter around her, and glared at Patricia, she looked odd enough to
make any one laugh.

"You look as if you'd like to spit like a cat," laughed Patricia, and
just at that moment the boy who was driving turned to ask which way he
should go.

"I got ter take them bags over ter the big old house what's painted the
color er this pung, an' stands between a old barn an' a carriage shed.
Know where 'tis?" he asked.

"Indeed, I don't," declared Patricia.

"Wal, I was goin' ter say that I kin git there by two different roads,
an' I'd go the way ye'd like best ter go ef ye knew which that was," he
said. "I only know I want the ride, and this road is stupid and poky.
Go the way that has the most houses on it," Patricia answered, and the
boy turned into another avenue, and soon they were passing houses
enough, such as they were!

Small houses that were dingy, and held one family, and larger ones that
must have held three tribes at least, judging by the number of washings
which hung upon the dilapidated piazzas.

"G'lang!" shouted the boy, but the nag had heard that too often to be
impressed, and he only wagged one ear in response, but took not a step
quicker.

Arabella was cold and provoked that she had come. Patricia was excited,
and felt that she was having a frolic, and even Arabella's glum face
could not quiet her; indeed, the more she looked at her, the more
inclined was she to laugh. Arabella felt aggrieved.

"The idea of laughing at _me_," she thought, "when I should think I
might laugh at her for inviting me to ride in a sleigh that is only a
_pung_!"

Then something happened which made Arabella forget that she was provoked
with Patricia, because she suddenly became so vexed with some one else.

A short, stubby boy with a mass of hay-colored hair, ran out from a yard
that they were passing.

"Ho! Look at the girlth a-havin' a ride out! Look at the horthe! My,
thee hith bonthe thtick out! Gueth they feed him on thawdutht an'
shavingth, don't they, Mandy?"

"Oh, look at 'em! Look at 'em! Them's some er the _private_ school;
don't they look _grand_ ridin' in Bill Tillson's grocery wagin?"
shouted Mandy.

"I wonder if that horthe would jump if I fired a thnowball?"

"Don't ye do it!" shouted the driver.

"Better not, Chub!" cried Mandy, thinking that perhaps the fun had gone
far enough.

The fact that he had been told not to made Chub long to do it.

"Here's the place," said the driver, and, grasping one of the bags, he
jumped from the team and ran into the house with the parcel. The reins
lay loosely upon the horse's back.

Chub, who had kept pace with the team, now paused to choose the most
interesting bit of mischief. Should he make a grab at the loose-lying
reins, and by jerking them surprise the horse, or would he be more
frisky if the half-dozen snowballs which he had been making were all
hurled at him at once?

Before he could decide, the boy came out of the house, and jumping into
the pung, gathered up the reins, and attempted to turn the team towards
home. Chub thought if he were to have any fun, he must get it quickly.

"_Heighoh_! You Jumpin' Ginger!" he shouted, at the same time letting
fly the six snowballs. The frightened nag reared, and turning sharply
about, tipped the pung, completely emptying it of passengers and
freight.

"That'th a _thpill_! Girlth an' _onionth_! Girlth an' _onionth_!"
shouted Chub, but Mandy, who was older, knew quite enough to be
frightened, that is, frightened for her own safety. If the little girls
were hurt, would some one blame her or Chub? The driver had stopped
the thoroughly terrified horse, the pung was not injured, so he thought
he might see if the children were harmed.

Mandy had helped Arabella to her feet, and picked up her shawls, which
had fallen off. She was more frightened than hurt, but her feelings were
injured. Patricia, brushing the snow from her cloak, spoke her thoughts
very plainly.

"Chub's a perfectly horrid boy," she said, "and we _might_ have broken
our necks."

"Ye _didn't_, though," said Mandy.

"And I shouldn't wonder if Ma had him put in the big lock-up," she said,
"for scaring our horse, and tipping us out on the road. We may get
_reumonia_ for being thrown into the snow."

"Ye can't 'rest Chub; he ain't nothin' but a big baby," said Mandy,
"an' what's _reumonia_, anyway?"

Patricia would not reply. The driver helped them to pick up the
cushions, but the bag of onions, which he had forgotten to take to the
big house, he left where they lay in the road. They were too widely
scattered to be gathered up.

Chub found a huge one, and commenced to eat it as eagerly as if it had
been a luscious bit of fruit.

"Thith ith _fine_," he said as he took a big bite from the onion.

"That Chub's a regular little pig," Patricia said, as they rode off, but
her words were not heard by Mandy or Chub, for the youthful driver was
shouting a loud warning to Chub to throw no more snowballs for fear of a
sound thrashing followed by arrest, while Chub, afraid to throw the
snowballs, hurled after the pung the worst names that he could think
of.

"That horthe ith thlow ath a old moolly cow! It'th an old thlow-poke!
What a thkinny nag! That horthe eath nothin' but newthpaper and
thtring!" he yelled.

"That Chub is just a horrid-looking child," said Patricia, "an' he's the
Jimmy boy's brother, but nobody'd ever think it."

"Who's the Jimmy boy?" Arabella asked.

"Why, don't you know the boy that we see sometimes at Dorothy Dainty's
house?"

Arabella shook her head.

"I mean the one that wears a cap with a gold band on it, and a coat with
brass buttons, and tries to walk like a man when Mr. Dainty sends him
out with parcels," explained Patricia.

"Oh, I know," said Arabella, "but _he's_ real _nice_ looking, and
Dorothy says her father thinks he's smart. I shouldn't think he could be
brother to that little pig or that Mandy girl."

"Well, he is, and one thing Dorothy said one day I couldn't understand.
She said that one reason why her father was so kind to Jimmy is because
Jimmy helped to get Nancy Ferris home one time when she was stolen from
them. Did you ever hear 'bout that? I don't see how just a boy could do
that, do you?"

No, Arabella did not see, nor had she heard the story, but she had seen
Jimmy, and she wondered that he belonged to such a family as that which
produced Mandy and Chub.

"Ye're 'most home," declared the driver, "an' soon's I've landed ye
I'll hev ter scoot."

"But you'll have to take Arabella home; she lives 'way over the other
side of the town," insisted Patricia.

"Oh, no, no, he _won't_!" said Arabella. "I'd rather walk all the way
than have Aunt Matilda know that I've been sleighing."

"Why, how funny!" and Patricia stared in surprise.

"It's funnier now than it would be when Aunt Matilda found it out."

"Why?" Patricia asked.

"Because," said Arabella, "whenever I've been out, and she thinks I've
taken cold, she boils some old herb tea, and makes me drink it hot, and
I have to be bundled in blankets, and she makes such a fuss that I wish
I hadn't gone anywhere at all." "I guess you'd better not tell her,"
Patricia advised, to which Arabella replied:

"I just don't intend to."

And while Dorothy and Nancy were standing before a blazing fire in the
sitting-room at the stone house, recounting the beauties of the sky, the
branches fringed with glittering icicles, the squirrels that raced
across the hard crust of snow, and indeed, every lovely bit of road or
forest which they had seen, Arabella, shivering as she hurried along,
saw the bright lights, and rushed past the great gate, across the avenue
and in at her own driveway. She hoped that every one would be talking
when she entered. She intended to join in the conversation, and she
thought if she could manage to talk very, _very_ fast, Aunt Matilda
might not ask where she had been. But she did. Arabella had removed
her hat and cloak, and trying very hard to stop shivering, she pushed
aside the porti√®re, and stood in the glow of the shaded lamp.

"Warmer weather to-morrow, the paper says, and I guess we shall all be
glad to have it," Aunt Matilda was saying.

"It w-would be f-fine to h-h-have it w-w-warmer," said Arabella, her
teeth chattering so that she thought every one must hear them rattle.

Over her paper Aunt Matilda's bright eyes peered at the little girl who
shivered in spite of her effort to stand very still.

"Where have you been, Arabella? You're chilled through. I say, where
have you been?"

"I've just taken quite a long walk," Arabella replied. "If you've
taken a long walk as late as this in the afternoon, you've come some
distance. Have you been spending this whole afternoon at that Lavine
girl's house?"

"No'm," said Arabella, "I haven't been in her house _any_ of the
afternoon; I've been out-of-doors."

Aunt Matilda threw up her hands in amazement, as if a number of hours in
the open air ought to have actually killed Arabella, whereas, she really
was alive, but exceedingly chilly.

Then the very thing happened which Arabella had told Patricia would
happen.

Aunt Matilda had her old-fashioned notions regarding the care of
children, and Arabella was sent to bed, packed in blankets, after having
drank a pint bowl full of the worst-tasting herb tea which Aunt Matilda
had ever brewed. She had thought that she might drink half of it, and
then throw the rest away, but as if guessing her intention, Aunt Matilda
stood close beside her to be sure that not a drop was wasted.

"It's no use to make such an outrageous face, Arabella," she remarked,
"for the worse it tastes the more good it's _sure_ to do."

"But I'd 'most rather have a cold than take that stuff," wailed
Arabella.

"That's the time you don't have your choice," was the dry reply.

And indeed she did not, for besides taking the despised herb tea, she
awoke the next morning with a heavy cold that kept her away from school
for the whole of the next week.