XIX

COLD FEET


YES! Jasper Jay looked sulky when Jimmy Rabbit told him to stand in the
puddle of water, close beside the cedar tree.

"How long do you want me to stay here?" Jasper growled. "I can tell you
that it's not very pleasant to stand in a pool of water a great
while--on a cold day like this."

Now, all this happened quite late in the fall. And it was true that the
day was a cold one. In fact, the weather seemed to be growing colder
every minute.

"I won't ask you to wait any longer than is necessary," said Jimmy
Rabbit. "And if you want me to put Reddy Woodpecker where he can't eat
any nuts, and you don't have to _see_ him, you must follow my
directions.... When you're ill and go to Aunt Polly Woodchuck, the herb
doctor, you always take her advice, don't you?"

Jasper admitted that he did.

"Well, then, you must do just as I say. You know, it always makes you
ill to look at Reddy Woodpecker. And I'm going to cure you, if you'll
only give me a chance."

So Jasper Jay went and stood in the puddle. He screamed a good deal as
he stepped into the cold water.

"This is terrible!" he groaned. "Do hurry with your scheme, or I shall
have a chill."

"Remember! You're to keep absolutely still!" Jimmy Rabbit warned him.
"You mustn't move and you mustn't talk. If you should, my plan would be
spoiled; and then you would have to fight Reddy Woodpecker after all."

"I pr-pr-promise!" said Jasper Jay. His bill was chattering so fast that
he could hardly talk. And he was so cold that he looked uncommonly
blue--even for a blue jay.

So Jimmy Rabbit hopped away, feeling quite pleased with himself and his
plan. If Jasper Jay could have seen him stop, as soon as he was out of
sight, and roll over and over upon the ground and hold his shaking sides
he might have wondered what Jimmy was laughing at. Certainly Jasper Jay
could see no joke in standing still in a cold puddle on a frosty fall
day.

Well, after a time Jimmy Rabbit stopped rolling upon the ground and
hurried straight to the place where the beeches grew. And there--as he
had hoped to--he found Reddy Woodpecker, busily eating beechnuts.

"How are the nuts this fall?" Jimmy Rabbit asked.

"They couldn't be better!" said Reddy, stuffing his mouth as he spoke.

"They say there's a big crop this year," Jimmy Rabbit observed.

"Yes!" replied Reddy. "But it's none too big. In fact, there are too
many people in this neighborhood that come here for nuts. I hope," he
said, "that's not what you're looking for."

Jimmy Rabbit laughed.

"Certainly not!" he said. "I'm satisfied to leave the nuts for you and
Jasper Jay to eat. I want none of them."

"Jasper Jay!" screamed Reddy Woodpecker. "Don't mention that rowdy's
name to me, please! He's the greediest of all! And he's so vain--so
proud of that sky-blue suit of his--that I can't bear the sight of him.
I wish I could put him where he couldn't eat any more of these
beechnuts, and where I wouldn't have to look at him, either!"

Of course, that was not at all an agreeable remark for him to make.

But it seemed to please Jimmy Rabbit greatly.