XI

A STROKE OF LUCK


JASPER'S fun would have been spoiled if he hadn't had a stroke of good
fortune. Since he was no longer leading the nutting party he wanted to
prevent his friends from following Noisy Jake to the place where the oak
trees grew, to have an acorn hunt.

It was no more than anybody could expect that Jasper should feel sulky.
It had been his party in the first place. So, of course, he didn't enjoy
seeing somebody else take the lead away from him. Most unhappy he was,
as he hurried along the mountain-side, when he happened, all at once,
to catch sight of a huge, grayish-brown figure, half hidden among some
hemlock boughs. Jasper Jay knew right away that it was Mr. Solomon Owl.

"Stop! stop!" Jasper cried to his friends. "Wait a bit! Here's some
fun!"

So the nutting party checked their flight and returned, while Jasper
pointed out Solomon Owl's motionless form to them.

They forgot all about the acorn hunt, for the time being, because there
was nothing they liked better than teasing Solomon Owl--when there were
enough of them. In case any of the blue-coated rascals met Mr. Owl
alone, he was most polite to him, for Solomon was not only big and
strong but he had sharp talons and a hooked beak.

Those thirteen blue jays, however, knew that they had little to fear
from the solemn old chap, so long as they kept out of reach of his
claws.

They began jeering at Solomon Owl. And some of them even tried to mock
his queer cry, "_Whoo-whoo-too-whoo-too-o-o!_" The woods echoed with
their hoots. And Noisy Jake shouted:

"This is luck! Aren't you all glad I found him?"

Now, of course, Jake had not found Solomon Owl. If it hadn't been for
Jasper Jay no one would have known he was there. And Jasper was just
about to remind Jake of his mistake when he happened to think of
something that made him change his mind. It occurred to Jasper that if
Noisy Jake wanted to think he was still the leader of the party perhaps
it was just as well to let him. Jake always talked so much, in such a
loud tone, that Solomon Owl would be sure to know him.

And Jasper thought he could have plenty of fun himself, teasing Solomon
and not saying a word. Then--so Jasper believed--then Solomon Owl
wouldn't know that Jasper was in the party at all.

You see, Johnnie Green was not the only person who held that Solomon Owl
couldn't see in the daytime. Everybody knew that his big, round eyes
were keen enough in the dark. But in the daylight he usually sat quite
still in a tree and stared as if he saw nothing at all.

Well, that was just what Solomon Owl was doing then. He said never a
word. And he scarcely moved, except to turn his head helplessly now and
then, and blink, while his tormentors flew as close to him as they dared
and hooted loudly at him.

Jasper and his friends made enough noise to scare even a bigger bird
than Solomon Owl. And they said a good many rude things to him, too.

"How are Farmer Green's chickens this fall?" Noisy Jake asked him in a
loud voice, while Jasper Jay quietly amused himself by dropping hemlock
seeds upon Solomon's head.

Still Solomon Owl made no remarks at all. But he was thinking deeply.
And though some people claimed that he was not nearly so wise as he
looked, there were some things that he knew just as well as anyone else.

But Jasper Jay was not aware of that.